* Derive secondary statistics such as Toughness or melee damage.
* Resist effects such as being grappled or counter spells, powers, or social attacks such as Taunt or Intimidation.

Characters are defined by their "Traits," attributes and skills ranked by die types. Ad6 is average, while higher die types reflect much greater ability.

Attributes are primarily passive or innate abilities used for resisting effects like fear or supernatural attacks. Skills are used to actively do things or affect others. Exceptions occur, but these are the foundational differences between the two concepts.

Attributes
Attributes don't directly affect skill rolls. Savage Worlds treats learned knowledge and training as the most relevant and direct factors. A high attribute allows one to increase a skill faster and opens up options to Edges that greatly differentiate two characters with the same skill.
Every character starts with a d4 in each of five attributes:
Agility is a measure of a character's nimbleness, dexterity, and general coordination.
Smarts measures raw intelligence, mental acuity, and how fast a heroine thinks on her feet. It's used to resist certain types of mental and social attacks.
Spirit is self-confidence, backbone, and willpower. It's used to resist social and supernatural attacks as well as fear.
Strength is physical power and fitness. It's also used as the basis of a warrior's damage in hand-to-hand combat, and to determine how much he can wear or carry. 
Vigor represents an individual's endurance, resistance to disease, poison, or toxins, and how much physical damage she can take before she can't go on. It is most often used to resist Fatigue effects, and as the basis for the derived stat of Toughness.

Using Attributes
Attributes are used to:
* Determine how fast skills increase duringAdvancement (page 54).
* Limit access to Edges (page 37).

Skills
Heroes have 12 points to buy skills during character creation. A skill that's below the linked attribute (noted in parentheses beside the skill name) is cheaper to increasethan one that's at or above it. See page 55 for Character Creation and page 54 for Advancement. Core skills are marked with a red star, and start at d4 for player characters (see page 10). Characters can attempt skills they don't have but it's more difficult. See Unskilled Attempts on page 89.
Academics (Smarts) 
Academics reflects knowledge of the liberal arts, social sciences, literature, history, archaeology, and similar fields. If an explorer wants to remember when the Mayan calendar ended or cite a line from Macbeth, this is the skill to have. 

Athletics (Agility)
Athletics combines an individual's coordination with learned skills such as climbing, jumping, balancing, biking, wrestling, skiing, swimming, throwing, or catching. Characters who rely on physical power more than coordination can take the Brute Edge (page 38) to link this skill to Strength instead of Agility.

Battle (Smarts)
Battle is an individual's command of strategy and tactics. It can be used for general military knowledge and is critical when commanding troops in Mass Battles (see page 131).

Boating (Agility)
Characters with this skill can handle most anyboat or ship common to their setting. They also know how to handle common tasks associated with their vessel such as tying knots, rigging sails, or following currents.

Skill Changes in this Edition of Savage Worlds
Here's a summary of the most important skill changes in this edition of Savage Worlds.
Core Skills
Every hero starts with a d4 in five basic abilities: Athletics, Common Knowledge, Notice, Persuasion, and Stealth. A d4 doesn't mean they're good at these skills, but they have some basic experience with them.
MAJOR CHANGES:
* Charisma was removed from the game.
* Climbing has been folded into Athletics.
* Common Knowledge is now its own skill rather than a Smarts roll.
* Investigation is now Research to make its meaning and usage more clear.
* Focus is a new skill for the Gifted Arcane Background.
* Knowledge has been broken down into the separate skills used in most campaigns. Specifically: Academics, Battle, Electronics, Hacking, Language, Occult, and Science.
* Lockpicking is now part of Thievery, which also handles pickpocketing, sleight of hand, safecracking, and other roguish tricks.
* Performance is a new skill.
* Repair and its use are better defined.
* Streetwise is now an Edge.
* Swimming is handled by Athletics.
* Throwing is covered by Athletics.
* Tracking is now part of Survival.

Common Knowledge (Smarts)
Characters roll Common Knowledge to know people, places, and things of their world, including etiquette, geography, culture, popular technology, contacts, and customs.
Driving (Agility)
Driving allows a hero to control any powered ground vehicle common to his setting. This includes cars, motorcycles, tanks, and the like. (Bikes and other self-powered transports use Athletics, beast-drawn transports use Riding.) Characters in modern settings where vehicles are ubiquitous don't need Driving for ordinary travel. Driving rolls are typically only needed in dangerous or stressful conditions, such as Chases (page 113).
Electronics (Smarts)
Electronics allows a hero to use complex or specialized devices such as the control panels on industrial machines or the sensor systems found on spaceships in futuristic settings. Consumer or electronic devices common to the setting don't require Electronics, Common Knowledge suffices if a roll is required at all. In the modern world, this applies to video recorders, cell phones, etc. Fixing any type of broken electronic device uses the Repair skill (see page 34).
Faith (Spirit)
Faith is the arcane skill required for Arcane Background (Miracles), described on page 148.
Fighting (Agility)
Fighting covers all hand-to-hand (melee) attacks, whether it's with fists, axes, laser swords, or martial arts. See Chapter Three for the combat rules and the various maneuvers a warrior might attempt.
Focus (Spirit)
Focus is the arcane skill for Arcane Background (Gifted), see page 148.
Gambling (Smarts)
Gambling is common in the saloons ofthe Old West, the back rooms of criminal organizations, the barracks of most armies, or the flight decks of scifi spaceships. To simulate an hour of gambling without having to roll for every single toss of the
dice or hand of cards, have everyone agree on the stakes, such as $10, 10 gold coins, etc. Everyone in the game then makes a Gambling roll. The lowest total pays the highest total the difference times the stake. The next lowest pays the second highest the difference times the stake, and so on. If there's an odd man left in the middle, he breaks even.
 
Example: Red rolls highest with a 10 and Gabe rolls lowest with a 4. The difference is 6, so Gabe pays Red 6x the stake of $10, or $60.
Cheating: A character who cheats adds +2 to his roll. The GM may raise or lower this modifier depending on the particulars of the game or the method of cheating. If a cheater rolls a Critical Failure, however, he's caught. The consequences depend on the circumstances and who noticed, but are usually unpleasant!

Hacking (Smarts)
Hacking is the skill used to create programs and "hack" into secured systems. Use of this skill always requires a computer or interface of some sort. Most tasks are a simple Hacking roll. The amount of time it takes is determined by the GM, from a single action to hours, days, or even months depending on the complexity of the project. Success means the attempt works as desired and a raise halves the time required. Failure usually just means the hacker must try again, while a Critical Failure may mean the system locks the user out, issues an alarm, or enacts another countermeasure of some sort.
Language (Smarts)
In some settings, such as those that focus on pulp action or "planetary romance" (where characters frequently travel among many strange civilizations), speaking various languages can simply be roleplayed with halting dialogue and campy accents that start  out a little difficult and are quickly forgotten. The GM may ignore this skill altogether in these settings, or use the Multiple Languages Setting Rule on page 140. In more realistic settings, communication can be a major barrier that requires characters to put skill points into additional languages. In a 1980s World War Three game, for example, a group of United Nations paratroopers won't be able to speak with their foes unless they take Russian, Polish, or other languages common to the Warsaw Pact. If the Language skill is in use, it should be listed as Language (Spanish), Language (American Sign Language), etc. A character's die type also notes how fluent he is in it. (Characters start with a d8 in their own Language.)
LanGUaGe PrOFiCienCY
SKILL ABILITY
d4    The character can read, write, and speak common words and phrases.
d6    The speaker can carry on a prolonged but occasionally halting conversation.
d8    The character can speak fluently.
d10   The hero can mimic other dialects within the language.
d12   The speaker can masterfully recite important literary or oral works.

Healing (Smarts)
Healing has multiple uses, from treating Wounds to diagnosing diseases and analyzing certain kinds of forensic evidence. See page 96 for rules on mending and treating Wounds, and page 128 for treatment of disease or poison. Forensics: Healing can also be used to analyze evidence that relates to anatomical trauma, including cause and time of death, angle of attack, and similar matters. Success provides basic information and a raise increases the details uncovered.

A raise might mean he backs down for the remainder of the scene, spills all the beans, or runs away as fast as he can.
In or out of combat, a Critical Failure means the target is immune to this character's Intimidation attempts for the remainder of this encounter!
Networking: Intimidation can also be used  as a "macro" skill to simulate several hours of working the streets. See Networking on page 133 to see how to crack some heads for favors or information.

Intimidation (Spirit)
Intimidation is the art of frightening an opponent so that he backs down, reveals information, or flees. Intimidation is an opposed roll resisted by the opponent's Spirit. In combat, this is a Test (see page 108). Out of combat, a successful roll means the foe backs down for the most part, reveals some information, or slinks away when the opportunity presents itself.

31''Limited: Use whichever skill is lowest whenCreating Other Skillsperforming an action that requires knowledgeof a foreign language. Intimidation (if verbal),  Game Masters can create any skill theyPersuasion, Research, Taunt, etc., are allwant or need for their setting. If the skilllimited by the character's Language skill.has defined uses, she should work outexactly how it functions. If navigating This limitation never applies to a character'sthe stars is a big part of your planetary native tongue.EGAVASromance campaign and you don't think \x90 Notice (Smarts)the Electronics skill covers use of thenavigational systems, for example, you Notice is a hero's general awareness andmight want to add Astrogation. alertness. It's used to sense sights, sounds,tastes, and smells, spot clues, detect ambushes,Players can also add their own specialtyspot hidden weapons on a foe, or tell if a rivalskills (with the GM's approval). Theseis lying, frightened, happy, etc.aren't likely to come up much in mostsettings, however, unless the player Success conveys basic information\u2014theproactively looks for ways to use them. character hears movement in the forest,smells distant smoke, or senses someone isn'tExample: In Deadlands: Hell on Earth,being completely truthful.the heroes must rally the town against anA raise grants more detail, such as theapproaching mutant horde. Emily has a skilldirection of a sound or odor or what topic aof her own creation, Journalism. She decidesperson is avoiding or lying about.to use it to write an emotional article andprint it up for everyone in the settlement to Occult (Smarts)read. She gets a raise and the GM decidesOccult reflects knowledge and experiencethe entire town rallies to the defenders' side.with the paranormal most others don't evenbelieve exists. It can be used to decipherSkill Philosophystrange pictograms, recall information aboutNew players sometimes focus on some supernatural creatures, remember curesskills being so broad\u2014such as Fighting for monstrous maladies like lycanthropy oror Shooting\u2014and trying to make all other vampirism, or perform rituals.skills equally so. But the primary goal ofFinding information in a library, newspaperthe skill system is to create and supportmorgue, old tome, the internet, etc., uses thecharacter tropes. A shooter, whether he's aResearch skill. As noted there, however, if thesniper or a bowman, is ubiquitous acrossinvestigator's Occult skill is higher she maymany settings and all use a single ability\u2014use that instead. See Research on page 34.being able to fire weapons accurately. Youdon't need a skill for firearms and another Performance (Spirit)for bows to reinforce those character tropes.A good entertainer can lift the spirits, rally aInvestigators do need many different crowd to action, or simply earn a few bucksskills, however, because they do things in from the locals. Specifics depend on thecompletely different ways. A hard-nosed situation, setting, and how well the characterdetective needs Intimidation to work the is known in the area.streets, socialites mingle with high society,Performance covers singing, acting, playingbookworms hit the library, and computeran instrument, or similar tasks that require angeeks use Hacking to get what they want.audience to appreciate.Also, some skills just don't make senseRaising Funds: The amount of money awhen combined. You could combinecharacter can raise by performing is extremelyBoating, Driving, and Piloting intosubjective, but as a general rule a successful"Vehicles," for example, but then everyperformance raises 20% of the setting'smodern day person who can drive a carStarting Funds with a success and 30% withcould fly a plane. Consider that whena raise. The GM can multiply this amountyou're altering skills for your campaigns.by the performer's Rank if she feels it's


32''appropriate. These numbers work for typical Piloting (Agility)performers who might be known in a small Piloting allows a character to maneuverestablishment or area. Larger performances airplanes, helicopters, jet packs, or spaceships.can greatly boost the performer's fee, but also Rules for Chases and vehicular combat can berequire more time, energy, and setup. found in Chapter Four.Deception: Performance can be used A being with the innate ability to fly (he hasinstead of Persuasion if the character is wings, for example) uses Athletics instead.attempting to deceive, bluff, or disguiseCharaCterSherself and the GM agrees it makes sense in Psionics (Smarts)the context of the situation. This is the skill "psions" or "psis" use to\x90 Persuasion (Spirit) activate and control their psionic abilities.See the Arcane Background (Psionics) EdgePersuasion is the ability to convince others to on page 148.do what you want through reason, cajoling,deception, rewards, or other friendly means.Persuasion isn't mind control. It can change Reactionssomeone's attitude but not their goals. AThe GM can use the table below to rollbandit may let you keep a sentimental pieceor choose a character or group's initialof jewelry with a good Persuasion roll but stillattitude.takes all your other goods.When used to Support allies (page 106)reaCtiOn taBLeit's an unopposed roll. If the target is resistant,it's an opposed roll vs. the target's Spirit. The 2D6 INITIAL REACTIONGM should modify the roll as she sees fit Hostile: The target is openly hostile.based on roleplaying, any pertinent Edges or He may attack if possible, or other-wise betray, report on, or hinderHindrances that affect the conversation, and2 the party at the first opportunity.the circumstances.He doesn't help without an over-Reaction Level: How much a person is whelming reward or threat of somewilling to cooperate depends largely on their kind.attitude toward whoever's talking to them. Unfriendly: The character isn'tThe Game Master can decide how nonplayer 3 interested in helping unless hehas little choice and/or is offered acharacters feel based on the setting, or roll onsubstantial payment or reward.the Reaction Table (see sidebar) if she has noUncooperative: The target isn'tpreconceived notions.interested in getting involved unless4\u20135Success improves the target's attitude one there's a significant advantage tolevel and a raise improves it two. Further himself.increases aren't generally possible in the Neutral: The character has no par-same encounter\u2014it takes individuals a little ticular attitude toward the group.6\u20138time to adjust their biases. He expects fair payment for any sortof favor or information.Failure means the target won't change hisCooperative: The character is gener-mind this scene or until the situation changes9\u201310 ally sympathetic. He helps if he canin some important way. A Critical Failurefor a small fee, favor, or kindness.also reduces the target's attitude two levels.Friendly: The individual goes out ofOnly one roll should generally be allowed his way for the hero. He likely doesper interaction unless new information is 11 simple tasks for very little, and isrevealed, a substantial reward is offered, etc. willing to do more dangerous tasksfor fair pay or other favors.Networking: Characters can also useHelpful: The target is anxious toPersuasion as a "macro skill," simulating a12 help the hero and probably does sofew hours or an evening's time hobnobbingfor little or no reward.and socializing to gain favors or information.See Networking on page 133.


33''Repair (Smarts) The amount of time this takes is up to theRepair is the ability to take apart and/or fix GM and the situation. Finding something onmechanical gadgets, vehicles, weapons, and the internet or a specific passage in a book simple electrical devices. It also covers the might be possible in a combat round. Lookinguse of demolitions and explosives. through books in a library, searching theinternet for a complex topic, or digging upHow long a Repair roll takes is up to thebackground information on an individualGM and the complexity of the task. Fixing aEGAVAS usually takes about an hour.Wound on a compact car in a post-apocalypticsetting might take an hour. Fixing a Wound Success finds basic information and a raiseon the same car in the present day might take provides more detail. Failure means thefour hours if the character wants it painted, researcher doesn't find what she's looking for.polished, etc. Success means the item is A Critical Failure might mean the researcherfunctional. A raise on the Repair roll halves finds plausible but incorrect information,the time required. triggers the notice of some opposed entityTools: Characters suffer a minor penalty (-1 or faction, reads something "Humanity Wasto -2) to their roll if they don't have access to Not Meant to Know" and suffers a mentalbasic tools, or a major penalty (-3 to -4) if the illness of some sort (a Minor Phobia, Quirk,device requires specialized equipment. etc.), or she might even accidentally destroythe source. The GM is encouraged to beElectronics: Repair can be used to repaircreative when such a mishap occurs, perhapselectronic devices, but is limited by the hero'sforcing the party to approach the situation inElectronics skill. Use whichever skill is lowest.a different way.Research (Smarts) Related Skills: If a character has a skill thatA character skilled in Research knows how relates directly to the subject he's researching,to make good use of libraries, newspaper he can use that instead of Research. Anmorgues, the internet, or other written explorer with Occult d10 and Research d6,sources of information. for example, rolls a d10 when investigatingvampire lore at a forgotten library. If he latergoes to search for the deed to a house wherethe vampires are rumored to lair, he rolls hisnormal Research instead.Note: Research may only provide the clues,Comprehensive Modifiersespecially in a mystery-heavy game. PuttingPrevious editions of Savage Worlds listed a the clues together from the informationhost of modifiers for things like Stealth and gathered is up to the players.Tracking (now part of Survival). We'veRiding (Agility)foregone those tables in this edition for amore subjective stance that allows the GM Riding allows a hero to mount, control,to look at the entire situation\u2014something and ride any beast or beast-drawn vehiclewe can't sum up in a table\u2014and assign a common to his setting. This includes horses,bonus or penalty on her own, usually from camels, dragons, wagons, chariots, and the+4 to -4. like. See the rules for Mounted Combat onpage 103.This allows her to consider all thefactors more generally, especially those Science (Smarts)that overlap (like dual penalties for rainThose with this skill have studied variousor darkness that both limit visibility andhard sciences such as biology, xenobiology,therefore shouldn't stack) and sum themchemistry, geology, engineering, or any otherup quickly and easily without having to"hard" science.consult a table in the middle of a tensescene. A successful Science roll reveals basicinformation about a topic, and a raise grantsmore details.


34''Shooting (Agility) walk the path through a dark forest withoutShooting covers all attempts to hit a target alerting the creatures that live there.with a ranged weapon such as a bow, pistol,Survival (Smarts)or rocket launcher (thrown weapons useAthletics, page 29). See Chapter Three for Survival allows a character to find food, water,details on ranged combat. or shelter in hostile environments. It can alsobe used to navigate wilderness environments,Spellcasting (Smarts) figure out which plants are good to eat andCharaCterSMages, wizards, warlocks, and witches use which aren't, and so on.Spellcasting to cast spells. See the Arcane A successful Survival roll provides enoughBackground (Magic) Edge on page 148. food and water for one person for one day; orfive people with a raise.\x90 Stealth (Agility)More detailed information on Hunger andStealth is the ability to hide and move quietly. Thirst can be found under Hazards on pageA simple success on a Stealth roll means the 125.character avoids detection if enemies aren'tTracking: Survival can also be used toparticularly alert. If the character fails thedetect and follow tracks. Each roll generallyroll, the enemy realizes something is amisscovers following the tracks for one mile, butand begins actively searching for whateverthe GM should adjust this as needed forroused them.specific circumstances.Once foes are alerted and active, Stealth isThe Game Master should assign a bonusopposed by Notice (a group roll if there areor penalty based on the target, environment,many foes, see page 89).and time. Tracking a large group that recentlyThe GM should apply any circumstantial passed through a snow-covered area mightpenalties to Notice rolls for darkness, cover, grant a bonus of +4, while following a singlenoise, distractions, and any difference in the person over rocks and streams after moretarget's Scale (just like when attacking, see than a day incurs a -4 penalty.Scale on page 106). Sneaking through dryleaves might subtract 2 from the Stealth roll, Taunt (Smarts)for example, while spotting someone in the Taunt attacks a person's pride throughdark uses the Illumination penalty listed on ridicule, cruel jests, or oneupmanship.page 102 (-4). Don't apply the same modifierTaunt is an opposed roll resisted by theto both rolls, however. If Stealth is at -2 for theopponent's Smarts. In combat, this is a Testleaves, don't give Notice a +2 for them as well.(see page 108).Sneak Attack: Sneaking up close enoughOut of combat, success means the defenderto make a melee attack always requires anbacks down, slinks away, or starts a fight. Aopposed Stealth roll versus the target'sraise might leave the victim cowed for theNotice, whether the guard is actively lookingremainder of the scene, or make her stormfor trouble or not. If successful, the victim isout of the area fuming or even in tears, orVulnerable (page 100) to the attacker, butattack her tormentor recklessly (perhaps withonly until the attacker's turn ends. Witha Wild Attack on the first round of combat).a raise, the attacker has The Drop (page100) instead. A Critical Failure means the target isimmune to this character's Taunts for theMovement: In combat, characters rollremainder of the encounter.Stealth each turn as a free action at the end oftheir move or any action the GM thinks might Thievery (Agility)draw attention.Lockpicking, safecracking, picking pockets,Out of combat, the distance moved depends sleight of hand, setting and disablingentirely on the situation. The GM might want traps and similar acts of misdirection,a roll every minute if the group is sneaking sabotage, subterfuge, and manipulation arearound the perimeter of a defensive position, called Thievery.or every few miles if they're trying to quietly


35''FamiliarizationIf it's dramatically appropriate to show that a character is out of his element with the particular use of a skill\u2014such as picking up an alien weapon and trying to make a Shootingattack with it\u2014the GM should simply apply a penalty (usually -2 to -4) to the total.When to do this, and how large the penalty is, depends entirely on the situation. Agunslinger might suffer a penalty when using a bow, for example, at least until he'sEGAVAShad a day or two to practice. A professor might suffer a -4 to a Science roll if the playerspecifically says he's a world famous chemist when the check the GM has called forconcerns Paleozoic geology. (Though that's a great time to award a Benny if the playerroleplays his lack of knowledge!)How long a penalty lasts under repeated use depends on the skill in question. Physicalpenalties likely fade after a day or so of practice. Penalties for knowledge-based skills areremoved if the character spends time researching the subject matter and has access tosuitable materials. A French literature major who has time to study up on her Shakespeare,for example, shouldn't suffer a penalty to her Academics.In summary, use familiarization penalties for dramatic use or to illustrate differencesin cultures or technology levels. Even then, keep the story moving and don't get boggeddown in the minutiae.If used to pick a lock, crack a safe, disable a Weird Science (Smarts)trap, or perform a simple unopposed action, "Mad" scientists, inventors in worlds withsuccess opens or disables the device, and a magic (or technology far beyond ourraise does it in less time, without tripping own), alchemists, or artificers can be foundalarms, or whatever else the GM feels is throughout many Savage Worlds.appropriate.Though their techniques may vary, allSleight of hand, hiding or planting an item, use Weird Science as their arcane skill. Seeor picking a pocket require a simple success. the Arcane Background (Weird Science)If foes are actively watching the character, Edge on page 148 to learn more of theirThievery is opposed by Notice. wondrous ways.The Game Master should assign penaltiesfor particularly difficult circumstances.Picking a heavy padlock might have a -4penalty, while hiding a revolver in bulkywinter clothing might grant a +1 bonus.Failure typically means the character isspotted or it takes too much time (after whichthe character can try again). A Critical Failuretypically sets off the trap, alerts the victim, orjams the device so that it must be opened orinteracted with in a different way.Limited: Using Thievery on an electronicdevice, such as a keypad, is limited by thethief's Electronics skill. Use the lowest of thetwo skills.

