'EdgesBelow is a list of Edges common to mostsettings. You'll find new Edges designed foryour game world in official Savage Worldsbooks as well.The Edges are grouped by type to helpduring character creation. You'll find asummary on page 59.Unless an Edge specifically says otherwise,it may only be selected once.REQUIREMENTS: Below each Edge is theminimum Rank (see page 54) required totake it along with any other prerequisitessuch as attributes, skills, or other Edges.Background EdgesThese Edges are typically advantages acharacter is born with, learns fromprolonged and extensive training, orgains after exposure to certain events.Players can choose these Edgesafter character creation with alittle rationalization. An individ-ual might choose the AttractiveEdge, for example, by clean-ing herself up, getting amakeover, and generallypaying more attentionto her looks. Charactersmight be able to gain theArcane Background Edgeby finding a book of forbid-den knowledge or trainingwith another arcane type intheir party during down-time between adventures.AlertnessREQUIREMENTS: NoviceNot much gets by thishero. He's very observantand perceptive, and adds+2 to his Notice rolls tohear, see, or otherwise sensethe world around him. AmbidextrousREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+Your warrior is as deft with his left hand ashe is with his right. He ignores the Off-Handpenalty (see page 104).If holding a weapon in each hand, Ambi-dextrous characters may stack Parry bonuses(if any) from both weapons. CharaCterSArcane BackgroundREQUIREMENTS: NoviceExposure to strange energies, studies ata magical school, or gifts from divine orspiritual entities sometimes grant championstheir own powers and abilities. Such eventslead to the Arcane Background Edge andthe development of supernatural abilities.See Chapter Five for a complete descriptionof Arcane Backgrounds, powers, and howto use them.Arcane ResistanceREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+Magic and the supernatural hold littlesway with this individual. Whetherby nature, heritage, or training he'sparticularly resistant to magic,psionics, weird science, and othersupernatural energies.Arcane skills targeting the herosuffer a -2 penalty (even if cast byallies!) and magical damage isreduced by 2 as well.Improved ArcaneResistanceREQUIREMENTS:Novice, ArcaneResistanceAs above, but the penaltyto the arcane skill roll anddamage are increased to 4.AristocratREQUIREMENTS: NoviceThis individual was borninto privilege or came into itlater in life. She may or maynot have money (the Rich orFilthy Rich Edge), but she stillwalks in the elite social circlesof the setting.37''Aristocrats add +2 to Persuasion whenNetworking (see page 133) with the localelite, captains of industry, nobles, or other aristocrats. They also add +2 to CommonKnowledge rolls made to know the etiquetteof the upper class, recognize family trees orheraldry, or recall gossip concerning othersEGAVAS of their station.AttractiveREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d6+It's no secret people are more willing tohelp those they find physically attractive.Your character adds +1 to Performance andPersuasion rolls if the target is attracted to hisgeneral type (gender, sex, species, etc.).Very AttractiveREQUIREMENTS: Novice, AttractiveYour hero is drop-dead gorgeous. Heincreases his Performance and Persuasionbonus to +2.BerserkREQUIREMENTS: NoviceBerserkers become wild and nearly uncon-trollable when the "red rage" takes them, butthey are deadly killing machines as well!Immediately after suffering a Wound or aShaken result (from physical damage only),your hero must make a Smarts roll or goBerserk. She can voluntarily fail this check ifshe likes.Going Berserk has the following effects:\x84 FURY: The character's Strength increases adie type and every melee attack must be aWild Attack (see page 109). She cannot useany skills that require wit or concentration(GM's call). She may scream out threats anduse Intimidation, for example.\x84 ENRAGED: Adrenaline and rage fuelthe berserker's muscles, adding +2 toToughness. She ignores one level of Woundpenalties (this stacks with any other abilitiesthat reduce Wound penalties).\x84 RECKLESS ABANDON: Anytime a berserkerrolls a Critical Failure on a Fighting check,she hits a random target within range ofher attack (not the intended target), friend After five consecutive rounds of berserkfury, the hero takes a level of Fatigue. At tenrounds, she takes another level of Fatigue andthe rage ends. She may also choose to end herrage at any time by making a Smarts -2 roll(as a free action; possibly avoiding Fatigueif she manages to end her rage before it'sincurred!). Start the count anew if she goesberserk again, even in the same battle.BraveREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d6+Those with this Edge have learned to mastertheir fear, or have dealt with so many horrorsthey've become jaded. These valiant explorersadd +2 to Fear checks and subtract 2 fromFear Table results (see page 124).BrawnyREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength d6+,Vigor d6+Your bruiser is very large or very fit. Her Sizeincreases by +1 (and therefore Toughnessby 1) and she treats her Strength as one dietype higher when determining Encumbrance(page 67) and Minimum Strength to usearmor, weapons, and equipment without apenalty (page 66).Brawny can't increase a character's Sizeabove +3.BruteREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength d6+,Vigor d6+Brutes focus on core strength and fitnessover coordination and flexibility. They treatAthletics as linked to Strength instead ofAgility for purposes of Advancement. Thecharacter may also resist Athletics Tests withStrength if she chooses.Finally, Brutes increase the Short Range ofany thrown item by +1. Double that for theadjusted Medium Range, and double againfor Long Range. If a thrown item's Range is3/6/12, for example, a Brute's Range is 4/8/16.CharismaticREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+Your hero is likable for some reason. She maybe trustworthy or kind, or might just exudeconfidence and goodwill. You get one freereroll on Persuasion rolls.''ElanREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+Elan means energy or spirit. Those whohave it rise to the occasion when the goinggets toughest. When you spend a Benny toreroll a Trait, add +2 to the total. The bonusapplies only when rerolling. It doesn't applyto damage rolls (since they're not Trait rolls),nor does it apply to Soak rolls unless you'reusing another Benny to reroll the Vigor check.FameREQUIREMENTS: NoviceYour character is a minor celebrity of somesort. She might be a popular bard known ina particular fiefdom, a minor rock star, or abeloved B-movie actor.She makes double the normal fee whenperforming for pay (see Performance, page32). She can also use her celebrity to add +1to Persuasion rolls if a target is friendly andknows who she is (a Common Knowledgeroll modified by how likely the individual isto know the celebrity).The downside of Fame is that the individualis often recognized, others frequently wantsomething from her, she may be followedby fans or admirers, or she may not be able CharaCterSFamousREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, FameYour hero is truly famous. She's well-known in a large circle such as a country,a large industry, or a popular medium(film or television, the music industry). Shemakes 5\xd7 the normal fee when performingand adds +2 to Persuasion rolls wheninfluencing friendly individuals who knowwho she is.The price is higher for the truly Famous,too, with more demands on her time,obligations, rivals, scandals, and aninability to operate in crowds withoutbeing recognized.Fast HealerREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d8+Those with this blessing add +2 to Vigor rollsfor natural healing, and check every threedays instead of five (see Healing, page 96).Fleet-FootedREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d6+The hero's Pace is increased by +2 and hisrunning die increases one step (from d6 to d8,for example).39''LinguistREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d6+  This world-traveler has an ear for languages.She begins play knowing half her Smarts dietype in different Language skills of her choiceat d6 (see the Language skill on page 31).EGAVAS LuckREQUIREMENTS: NoviceThe adventurer seems to be blessed by fate,karma, the gods, or whatever external forceshe believes in (or believe in him!).He draws one extra Benny at the beginningof each game session, allowing him to succeedat important tasks more often than most, andsurvive incredible dangers.Great LuckREQUIREMENTS: Novice, LuckThe player draws two extra Bennies insteadof one at the start of each session.QuickREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+Quick characters have lightning-fast reflexesand a cool head. Whenever you are dealt anAction Card of Five or lower, you maydiscard it and draw again until youget a card higher than Five.Characters with both the LevelHeaded and Quick Edges first drawtheir additional card and choosewhich to take. If that card is aFive or less, the Quick Edge maybe used to draw a replacementuntil it's Six or higher.RichREQUIREMENTS: NoviceWhether the individual wasborn with a silver spoonin his mouth or earned itthrough hard work, he's gotmore money than most.Rich heroes start with threetimes the normal startingfunds for the setting. If aregular income is appropriatefor this setting, the hero receives the Filthy RichREQUIREMENTS: Novice, RichThis fortunate individual is very wealthy.He has five times the starting funds forthe setting during character creationand, if appropriate, a yearly income afterresponsibilities of around $500,000.Even wealthier chara cters may exist, butunless there's a game effect it probablyshouldn't matter. This should be workedout with the GM and come with many moreassets as well as onerous responsibilities.Combat EdgesThese Edges are designed to help your herodish out terrible damage\u2014or survive it\u2014inthe bloody battles of Savage Worlds.BlockREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Fighting d8+Through hard-fought experience your herohas learned to defend himself in vicioushand-to-hand combat. His Parry increasesby +1 and any Gang Up bonus againsthim is reduced by one.Improved BlockREQUIREMENTS: Veteran,BlockThe hero's Parry bonus isnow +2 and the Gang Upbonus against him isreduced by 2.''BrawlerREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength d8+,Vigor d8+His fists hit like hammers or his talons cut likescythes. His body feels like it's made of stone.Brawlers increase their Toughness by 1 androll Strength +d4 when hitting with their fistsor feet (or claws if they have them). If theyalready have a damage die from Claws (page18), the Martial Artist Edge, etc., increasethe damage die type by one instead.The Brawler Edge doesn't make the char-acter's fists Natural Weapons (page 104).BruiserREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, BrawlerThe fighter increases his Toughness anadditional +1, and the damage caused withhis fists or claws another die type.CalculatingREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d8+A few seconds to study your foe's actionsgives your hero a major advantage. When hisAction Card is a Five or less, he ignores up to2 points of penalties on one action that turn,which can include Multi-Action, cover, Range,and even Wound penalties.Combat ReflexesREQUIREMENTS: SeasonedYour warrior recovers quickly from shockand trauma. He adds +2 to his rolls whenattempting to recover from being Shakenor Stunned.CounterattackREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Fighting d8+Fighters with this Edge deal instantpunishment for an enemy's mistakes. Onceper round (if not Shaken or Stunned), thecharacter receives a Free Attack (page 101)against one failed Fighting attack against him.The counterattack takes place immediately(before other hits against the hero on the sameAction Card, if any).Improved CounterattackREQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Counterattack Dead ShotREQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Novice,Athletics or Shooting d8+When your Action Card is a Joker, double thetotal damage of your first successful Athletics(throwing) or Shooting roll this round.DodgeCharaCterSREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Agility d8+The hero can anticipate attacks or moveerratically under fire. Unless the victimof a surprise attack and taken completelyunaware, Dodge subtracts 2 from all rangedattacks made against the character. Dodgedoes not stack with actual cover, however.Improved DodgeREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, DodgeThe hero adds +2 when Evading area effectattacks. See Evasion on page 100.Double TapREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Shooting d6+Experienced firearms experts fire two shots inrapid succession without spoiling their aim.Double Tap can only be used with weaponsthat have a Rate of Fire of 1 and can fire twoshots without needing to manually reload. Itadds +1 to hit and damage at the cost of oneextra bullet. This is per action, so a shooter canDouble Tap more than once if she performs aMulti-Action.Double Tap cannot be combined with RapidFire.If used with a weapon capable of Three-Round Burst (see page 67), it adds +2 toShooting and damage instead of +1 andexpends six bullets.ExtractionREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+When a character withdraws from melee,adjacent attackers get a free Fighting attackagainst him (see Withdrawing from Meleeon page 109). This is a very dangerousproposition for most, but not your wilychampion.When moving away from adjacent foes, oneof them (player's choice), doesn't get his freeFighting attack.41''Improved ExtractionREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Extraction  Up to three foes' (player's choice) don't getattacks when your warrior moves out ofmelee with them.FeintEGAVASREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Fighting d8+When performing a Test (page 108) with theFighting skill, you can choose to make the foeresist with Smarts instead of Agility.First StrikeREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+Once per round, as long as he's not Shaken orStunned, the hero gets a free Fighting attackagainst a foe immediately after he moves intoReach. (See Free Attacks on page 101).Improved First StrikeREQUIREMENTS: Heroic, First StrikeAs above but the hero may attack up tothree foes each turn.Free RunnerREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+,Athletics d6+Your character practices "parkour" or is justvery skilled at running, jumping, swinging,scampering up walls, and over obstacles.As long as there are obstacles she can boundon, bounce off, or swing on, she moves at herfull Pace on Difficult Ground when on foot.She also adds +2 to her Athletics rolls whenclimbing and in foot Chases (see Chases &Vehicles page 113).FrenzyREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Fighting d8+A character with Frenzy rolls a secondFighting die with any one of his Fightingattacks for the turn. The extra die may beallocated to the same or different targets ashe sees fit. Resolve each separately.Improved FrenzyREQUIREMENTS: Veteran, FrenzyThe fighter rolls an extra Fighting die withup to two Fighting attacks in the same turn. Example: Red desperately attacks a giantcrab-like creature on an alien planet. She hasImproved Frenzy and decides to attack threetimes (a Multi-Action at the usual penalty).She rolls her Fighting skill with an extra die forher first attack and second attack. She doesn'tget the extra die on her third Fighting roll.Giant KillerREQUIREMENTS: VeteranThe bigger they are, the harder they are to kill.At least for most. Your hero knows how to findthe weak points in the most massive of foes.He adds +1d6 damage when attackingcreatures who are three or more Sizes largerthan himself (see Size, page 178). A human(Size 0) gets the bonus against a creature ofSize 3 or greater.Hard To KillREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+This adventurer has more lives than a herdof cats. He may ignore his Wound penaltieswhen making Vigor rolls to avoid BleedingOut (see page 95).Harder to KillREQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Hard to KillYour hero is tougher to kill than Rasputin.If he is ever "killed," roll a die. On an oddresult, he's dead as usual. On an even roll,he's Incapacitated but somehow escapesdeath. He may be captured, stripped of allhis belongings, or mistakenly left for dead,but he somehow survives.Improvisational FighterREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Smarts d6+Heroes often find themselves fighting withpieces of equipment or furnishings notdesigned for combat. A brawler with thisEdge has a knack for using such improvisedweapons. He ignores the usual -2 penaltywhen wielding them. See page 102 fordetails on Improvised Weapons.Iron JawREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d8+The hero can shrug off even extreme blows.He adds +2 to Soak rolls and Vigor rolls toavoid Knockout Blows (see page 100).''Killer InstinctREQUIREMENTS: SeasonedThis hero hates losing. He gets a free reroll inany opposed Test he initiates.Level HeadedREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Smarts d8+Fighters who can keep their cool when every-one else is running for cover make deadlycombatants. A hero with this Edge drawsan additional Action Card in combat andchooses which to use.Improved Level HeadedREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Level HeadedAs above but the hero draws two additionalcards and chooses which to keep.MarksmanREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Athletics d8+ orShooting d8+The hero is a natural with ranged weapons. Ifshe doesn't move in a turn and fires no morethan a Rate of Fire of 1 as her first action,she may add +1 to an Athletics (throwing)or Shooting roll, or ignore up to 2 points ofpenalties from Called Shots, Cover, Range,Scale, or Speed. This is a lesser version ofthe Aim maneuver and does not stack withit. Marksman doesn't apply to additionalattacks after the first.Martial ArtistREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Fighting d6+The fighter has trained in basic martial arts.Her fists and feet are weapons (see NaturalWeapons, page 104) so she's always consid-ered armed. She adds +1 when striking withthem and causes Strength+d4 damage. If shealready has a Strength damage die from theClaws racial ability (page 18) or the BrawlerEdge, increase the damage a die type.Martial Artist does not add to damage fromother Natural Weapons such as fangs or horns.Martial WarriorREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Martial ArtistIncrease the warrior's Fighting bonus to +2and her damage die an additional step. Mighty BlowREQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Novice,Fighting d8+If your Action Card is a Joker, double thedamage of your first successful Fightingattack this round.Nerves of SteelCharaCterSREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d8+Your hero has learned to fight on through themost intense pain. He may ignore 1 point ofWound penalties.Improved Nerves of SteelREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Nerves of SteelThe hero ignores two points of Woundpenalties.No MercyREQUIREMENTS: SeasonedWhen this killer spends a Benny to rerolldamage, he adds +2 to his final total.Rapid FireREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Shooting d6+The shooter is practiced at taking quick andaccurate shots. As long as she's armed witha fast-firing ranged weapon of some sort(such as a revolver or semi-automatic) andhas enough ammunition to do so, she mayincrease her weapon's Rate of Fire by 1 forany one of her Shooting attacks that turn.Improved Rapid FireREQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Rapid FireThe shooter may now increase her weapon'sRate of Fire by 1 twice in the same turn (viaa Multi-Action).Example: Gabe fires a machine gun and hasImproved Rapid Fire. The weapon has a Rateof Fire of 4 and Gabe decides to fire it on allthree of his allowed actions (see Multi- Actionson page 103).He rolls an extra Shooting die with his firstand second attack, raising the weapon's Rateof Fire to 5 each time. He doesn't get the bonuson his third attack\u2014the machine gun's Rate ofFire remains a 4.43''Rock and Roll!REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Shooting d8+  Experienced shooters learn to compensatefor the recoil of fully automatic weapons. Ifa character with this Edge doesn't move onhis turn, he ignores the Recoil penalty whenfiring at a Rate of Fire of 2 or higher. (SeeEGAVASRecoil, page 105.)Steady HandsREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+Firing from the back of a horse or movingvehicle is tricky business, but your adventurerhas figured it out. She ignores the UnstablePlatform penalty (see page 109).This also helps when running, reducing theusual penalty from -2 to -1 (see Movement,page 92).SweepREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength d8+,Fighting d8+Sweep allows a character to make a singleFighting attack and apply it against all targetsin his Reach at a -2 penalty (friends and foesalike). Resolve damage separately for eachenemy that's hit.A fighter may only perform a Sweep onceper turn. It may not be combined with Frenzy.Improved SweepREQUIREMENTS: Veteran, SweepAs above but the whirlwind of death mayignore the -2 penalty.Trademark WeaponREQUIREMENTS: Novice, skill with chosenweapon of d8+The hero knows one unique weapon(Excalibur, Old Betsy, Sting) like the back ofhis hand. When using it, he adds +1 to hisAthletics (throwing), Fighting, or Shootingrolls, and +1 to Parry when readied (even ifit's a ranged weapon).A fighter can take this Edge multiple times,applying it to a different weapon each time.If a Trademark Weapon is lost, he can replaceit but the benefits don't kick in for a few days(however long the GM feels is dramatically Improved Trademark WeaponREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, TrademarkWeaponAs above but the bonuses when using theweapon increase to +2.Two-FistedREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+If a character makes a Fighting attack withone action and another from a different handin a later action, the second attack doesn'tinflict a Multi-Action penalty. The Off-Handpenalty still applies unless he's Ambidextrous,however (page 104).If the character has Two-Gun Kid, thesecond action may also be a ranged attack.Two-Gun KidREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+Two-Gun Kid works just like Two-Fisted,but with ranged weapons, allowing her tofire or throw a weapon in each hand as twodifferent actions but without triggering aMulti-Action penalty.If the character has Two-Fisted, the secondaction may also be a melee attack.Example: Red has a sword in one hand and apistol in the other. She has both Two-Fisted andTwo-Gun Kid, so she can make a Fighting attackon one action and then a second Fighting orShooting attack with no Multi-Action penaltyon a later action that turn.Leadership EdgesLeadership Edges grant bonuses to allies,making them more effective, reliable, ordurable.Unless an Edge says otherwise, it onlyaffects allied Extras. Wild Cards only benefitif the leader has the Natural Leader Edge.Leadership Edges aren't cumulative withthe same Edge from other leaders. Charactersmay benefit from different Leadership Edgesby the same or different leaders, however.Command Range: Allies must be within 5\u2033(10 yards) to benefit from her abilities. This iscalled her "Command Range."''CommandREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d6+Command is the basic ability to give clearinstructions and support to allies in the thickof battle. Extras in Command Range add+1 to their Spirit rolls when attempting torecover from being Shaken and Vigor whenattempting to recover from being Stunned.Command PresenceREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, CommandA booming voice, effective commands,natural charisma, or simple training resultsin a much more effective combat element. Ahero with this Edge has a Command Rangeof 10\u2033 (20 yards).FervorREQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Spirit d8+,CommandA simple phrase uttered by a great leadercan sometimes have momentous results. Acommander with this ability can inspire histroops to bloody fervor by yelling a motto,slogan, or other inspirational words.Extras in range add +1 to their Fightingdamage rolls.Hold the Line!REQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Smarts d8+,CommandHold the Line strengthens the will of anyExtras under the hero's command, adding +1to their Toughness.InspireREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, CommandExceptional leaders inspire those aroundthem to great feats of valor and determination.Once per turn, the hero may roll his Battleskill to Support one type of Trait roll, andapply it to all allied Extras in CommandRange. A leader could Support all Shootingattacks in range, for example, or all Spirit rollsto recover from being Shaken.Inspire is an action and requires some sortof communication with those it affects.favorites"."One of my Natural LeaderREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Spirit d8+,CommandThis leader has proven herself time and timeagain, gaining the respect of all those whofight by her side.Any Leadership Edge that says it appliesonly to Extras now applies to Wild Cards as CharaCterSwell.TacticianREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Smarts d8+,Command, Battle d6+The commander has a natural grasp of smallunit tactics and can take advantage of rapidlychanging situations.A Tactician is dealt an extra Action Cardeach round of combat or a chase\u2014keptseparate from his own cards. At the startof the round, he may discard it or give it toany one allied Extra in Command Range.The player or GM controlling the receivingcharacter can decide whether to accept andreplace her current Action Card, or discard it.Master TacticianREQUIREMENTS: Veteran, TacticianThe Tactician now gets a total of two extraAction Cards to distribute each round.Power EdgesPower Edges are the key to unlocking the truepotential of those with Arcane Backgrounds(explained in Chapter Five). They can meanthe difference between an apprentice with afew abilities and a master of magic, miracles,psionics, or weird science!ArtificerREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, ArcaneBackground (Any)Those who tangle with supernatural forcessometimes find ways to imbue powers intoitems. They may turn an ordinary blade intoa magic sword, grant powerful potions totheir friends, or even bless holy relics withdivine grace.Artificers can create Arcane Devices andgive them to their allies. See page 153.45''ChannelingREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, ArcaneBackground (Any) When the character gets a raise on her arcaneskill roll (or roll to activate or use an arcanedevice), she reduces its Power Point cost by 1.This can take it to 0.EGAVASConcentrationREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, ArcaneBackground (Any)Through training and focus, the caster isextremely efficient in channeling arcaneforces. The base Duration of any non-Instantpower is doubled. This includes maintainingpowers as well.Extra EffortREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, ArcaneBackground (Gifted), Focus d6+Some Gifted can dig deep into their soulsto signifi cantly boost theirpowers.Extra Effort in creases aFocus total after it's rolledby +1 for 1 Power Point,or +2 for 3 PowerPoints. It may notbe used to improve aCritical Failure.GadgeteerREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, ArcaneBackground (Weird Science), WeirdScience d6+Some mechanical gurus can buildincredible devices out of most anything.A Gadgeteer can spend up to threePower Points to "jury rig" a devicefrom most any reasonable collectionof spare parts. This allows her touse any power normally availableto Weird Scientists of her Rank orlower in her particular setting, witha Power Point cost of 3 or lower.The total cost of the power (plus anymodifiers) cannot exceed the pointsspent to create it, but she may createmultiple devices as long as she has the This takes one entire turn, during whichshe can do nothing else but make a WeirdScience roll at -2 (she cannot take Multi-Actions that turn).The inventor uses Power Points directlyfrom her pool for the device, but once its initialDuration is finished (it cannot be maintained)it falls apart into its component pieces.Example: Gabe is an inventor in the WeirdWest. He wants to use boost Trait to help Redfight a giant rattlesnake, but only has the burstand blast powers. Fortunately, he's a Gadgeteer,so Gabe can put boost Trait into an "electricalbio-inducer." The device can take up to threepoints worth of powers, so he adds the Hurrymodifier and gives Red +2 Pace as well.Holy/Unholy WarriorREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, ArcaneBackground (Miracles), Faith d6+Believers face grave dangers inservice to their divine patrons. Tosurvive such hard ships, the forcesof good (or evil) grant miraclesand the ability to turn their favorinto supernatural protection.The chosen mayadd +1 to thetotal of a finalSoak roll foreach Power Pointspent, to a max imumof +4.MentalistREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned,Arcane Background(Psionics), Psionics d6+Constant contact withmultiple minds givesthese psionic agents anedge when it comes toforcing or resisting mentalassaults.Mentalists add +2 to opp-osed Psionics rolls, whetherthey are using their powersagainst a foe or defendingagainst a rival.''New PowersREQUIREMENTS: Novice, ArcaneBackground (Any)An arcane character may learn two newpowers by choosing this Edge (which may betaken multiple times). He may choose fromany powers of his Rank or lower normallyavailable to his particular Arcane Background.A character can add a new Trapping on apower she already has instead of gaining anew one. She might add an ice Trapping toher existing fire bolt, for example, so she couldswitch between ice and fire Trappings freely.Power PointsREQUIREMENTS: Novice, ArcaneBackground (Any)Wizards, weird scientists, and other arcanetypes always want more power. This Edgegrants them an additional 5 Power Points.Power Points may be selected more thanonce, but only once per Rank. It may be takenas often as desired at Legendary Rank, buteach grants only 2 additional points.Power SurgeREQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Novice, ArcaneBackground (Any), arcane skill d8+The character recovers 10 Power Points whenhis Action Card is a Joker. This may notexceed his usual limit.Rapid RechargeREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Spirit d6+,Arcane Background (Any)Power Points normally recharge at a rateof 5 points every hour spent resting (seeRecharging, page 151). This Edge increasesthat rate to 10 every hour.Improved Rapid RechargereQUireMentS: Veteran, Rapid RechargeThe character now regains 20 Power Pointsper hour spent resting.Soul DrainREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, ArcaneBackground (Any), arcane skill d10+Desperate times call for desperate measures. taking a level of Fatigue to recover up to fivePower Points. She can take an additional levelof Fatigue (to Exhaustion) to recover up tofive more Power Points. She cannot renderherself Incap acitated in this way.Fatigue incurred by Soul Drain comesfrom deep within and may only be recoverednaturally. The relief power and similarCharaCterSabilities have no effect.WizardREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, ArcaneBackground (Magic), Spellcasting d6+Magic is varied and wonderful, and wizardsare exposed to countless tomes, scrolls,and incantations as they master their craft.Sometimes they use this knowledge to recallvariations of their various enchantments.A Wizard can spend 1 extra Power Pointwhen casting a power to change its Trapping.A fireball (blast) might manifest as alightning bolt, for example. This can oftenhave important consequences if a foe hasa particular resistance or weakness to thespell's usual Trapping.Professional EdgesProfessional Edges reflect years of practice orexperience in a particular trade, activity, orcraft. In some cases they may also representspecial blessings from higher powers as well.Players may purchase Professional Edgesafter character creation, perhaps roleplayingthe achievement by practicing the affectedtrade during downtime or in betweenadventures.Stacking: Bonuses to the same Trait fromdifferent Professional Edges do not stack.Apply only the highest.AceREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+Aces are pilots and drivers who have a specialaffinity with their car, boat, plane, or othervehicle. They ignore two points of penaltiesto any Boating, Driving, or Piloting roll, andmay spend Bennies to Soak damage for anyvehicle they control or command, using theappropriate Boating, Driving, or Pilotingskill instead of Vigor. Each success and raisenegates a Wound.47''AcrobatREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+,Athletics d8+ The Acrobat gets one free reroll on Athleticstotals that involve balance, tumbling, orgrappling. It doesn't affect rolls to interruptactions, climb, swim, or throw.EGAVASCombat AcrobatREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, AcrobatThe tumbler leaps quickly about so thatattacks against her are made at -1 aslong as she's aware of the attack, canreasonably move about, and isn't sufferingany Encumbrance or Minimum Strengthpenalties.AssassinREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+,Fighting d6+, Stealth d8+Assassins are trained killers who know howto kill even the toughest foes. They add +2 todamage rolls when their foe is Vulnerable orthey have The Drop. InvestigatorREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d8+,Research d8+Investigators spend a great deal of timeresearching ancient legends, working thestreets, or deducing devilish mysteries.Some of these heroes are actual privateinvestigators while others are sleuthingmages in a fantasy world or inquisitivecollege professors stumbling upon ThingsMan Was Not Meant to Know.Investigators add +2 to Research rolls andNotice rolls made to search through desks forimportant papers, sift through stacks of junkmail for something of note, or spy obscureditems from piles of junk or debris.Jack-Of-All-TradesREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d10+Through advanced schooling, book-learning,computer-enhanced skill programs, or justamazing intuitive perception, your hero has atalent for picking up skills on the fly. There'slittle he can't figure out given a little time anda dash of luck.''The character makes a Smarts roll as anaction after observing or studying somesubject. She gains a d4 in the relevant skillwith success, or d6 with a raise. She may tryagain after an hour of study, trial and effort,or immersion if she fails or wants to try for araise. This lasts until the character attemptsto learn a different subject, whether she'ssuccessful or not.McGyverREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d6+,Notice d8+, Repair d6+A McGyver can improvise a device fromcommon resources when the need arises.Given a few simple items, he can make aRepair roll to craft improvised weapons,explosives, or tools, that last until used or theend of the encounter (GM's call). This takesone entire turn, and he can't move or take anyother actions while constructing the device.Failure means the device isn't ready. ACritical Failure means he doesn't have theright materials and can't create the devicethis encounter.Success creates a minor explosive (2d4explosive in a Small Blast Template), a oneshot projectile weapon like a "zip gun"(Range 5/10/20, Damage 2d6), rickety raft,electrical source, etc.A raise creates a larger explosive (2d6 in aMedium Blast Template or 2d4 in a Large), abetter ranged weapon (five shots, 2d8 damage,Range 10/20/40), a more stable raft, a morepowerful battery, etc.The quality or power of the creation iscompletely up to the Game Master, butcreativity should be rewarded, particularlyin the most dire and dramatic situations.Mr. Fix ItREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Repair d8+The mechanic adds +2 to Repair rolls. With araise, he halves the time normally requiredto fix something. This means if a particularRepair job says a raise repairs it in half thetime, a Mr. Fix It can finish the job in one-quarter the time with a raise. ScholarREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Research d8+Learned professors, devoted students, andamateur enthusiasts spend great amountsof time and energy studying particularsubjects. They become experts in these fields,and rarely fail to answer questions in theirparticular area of expertise. CharaCterSPick any one of the following skills:Academics, Battle, Occult, Science, or aSmarts-based "knowledge"-type skillallowed in your setting, and add +2 to thetotal whenever they're used.This Edge may be taken more than once ifapplied to different skills.SoldierREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Strength d6+,Vigor d6+Professional soldiers get used to carryingheavy loads, and enduring harsh conditions.After a few days getting used to their gear(GM's call), they treat their Strength as one dietype higher when determining Encumbrance(page 67) and Minimum Strength to usearmor, weapons, and equipment withouta penalty (page 66). (This stacks with theBrawny Edge.)They also get a free reroll on Vigor rollsmade to survive environmental hazards (seeHazards, page 125).ThiefREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Agility d8+,Stealth d6+, Thievery d6+Thieves specialize in deceit, treachery, andacrobatics. They can be invaluable wheretraps must be detected, walls must be climbed,and locks must be picked.Thieves know how to use protrusions onwalls and window ledges to climb the tallestof buildings, scampering through streets andback alleys like cats. They add +1 to Athleticsrolls made to climb in urban areas.Thieves also know how to use the darkareas between the streetlights of cities toconceal their movements, and add +1 toStealth rolls when in an urban environment.Finally, these rogues are\u2014not surprisingly\u2014adept at Thievery itself, adding +1 to thoserolls in all circumstances.49''WoodsmanREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d6+,Survival d8+ Woodsmen are rangers, scouts, and hunterswho are more at home in the wilderness thanin urban areas. They are skilled trackers andscouts, and know how to live off the land forEGAVASmonths at a time.Woodsmen add +2 to Survival rolls, andStealth rolls made in the wild (not towns,ruins, or underground).Social EdgesGetting people to do what you want is acritical skill in most any setting.BolsterREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+Belittling or humiliating an enemy can alsoboost your ally's spirits. When this charactersuccessfully Tests a foe, he may also removethe Distracted or Vulnerable state (page100) from one of his allies.Common BondREQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Novice,Spirit d8+Selfless heroes and determined leaders knowtheir greatest strength often comes fromtheir companions, and are willing to givesome of their own fortune, fate, or luck tosupport them.A character with this Edge may freely giveher Bennies to any other character she cancommunicate with. The player should explainwhat form this takes, from a quick shout ofencouragement to a welcome pat on the back.ConnectionsREQUIREMENTS: NoviceYour heroine is connected to people ororganizations who can help her when thechips are down. It might be the mob, the Feds,a union, or even other adventurers.Connections may be taken more than once,selecting a new faction or contact each time.Once per session, and assuming she can get intouch with them, the heroine can call on herfriends for a favor. The favor depends on the nature of thecontact (GM's call), but might include a loan,gear, a few allied fighters, transportation,information, or even a professional withcritical skills the party doesn't have, like ahacker or scholar.HumiliateREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Taunt d8+Those with a cruel wit can destroy a rival'sego in a single remark or well-timed gesture.Your hero gets a free reroll on Taunt Tests.MenacingREQUIREMENTS: Novice, any one ofBloodthirsty, Mean, Ruthless, or UglyBeing a brutish lout isn't always a drawbackif you know how to use it. Menacing allowsa character to put her bad looks or worseattitude to good use. The goon adds +2 to herIntimidation rolls.ProvokeREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Taunt d6+Clever characters can manipulate their foes,drawing enemy focus on themselves toprotect their allies. Once per turn, when yourhero uses Taunt for a Test and gets a raise (seeTest, page 108), she may Provoke the foe.In addition to all the usual effects of thesuccess and raise, the enemy suffers a -2penalty to affect any other target besidesthe one who provoked her. This stackswith Distracted but not further instancesof Provoke.Provoke lasts until a Joker is drawn,someone else Provokes the target, or theencounter ends. Provoke can affect multipletargets, and may be combined with RabbleRouser (see below).Rabble-RouserREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Spirit d8+This instigator knows how to rile up severalenemies at once.Once per turn, a character with this Edgecan make a social Test with Intimidation orTaunt against all enemies in a Medium BlastTemplate. The targets must be able to see andhear the hero clearly. Each defender resistsand is affected by the Test separately.''ReliableREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+People know they can depend on your herowhen they need assistance. He gets a freereroll on any Support roll.RetortREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Taunt d6+This verbal duelist can turn the slings andarrows of social combat right back at theunwitting fools who hurled them.If a character with Retort gets a raise whenresisting an Intimidation or Taunt Test, thefoe is Distracted.StreetwiseREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Smarts d6+Streetwise characters know how to find thelocal black market, fence stolen goods, avoidthe local law (or criminal element!), lay lowwhen the heat's on, obtain illegal weapons,find out which "boss" is hiring muscle,or similar shady activities.Streetwise characters add +2 toIntimidation or Persuasion rollsmade to Network (see page 133)with shady or cri minal elements.They also add +2 to CommonKnowledge rolls per taining tothe types of disreputable activitieslisted above.Strong WilledREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+Self-confidence is powerful armoragainst those who attempt to attackthis individual's will. He adds +2 to histotal when resisting Tests with Smartsor Spirit.Iron WillREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned,Brave, Strong WilledThe hero now adds his StrongWilled bonus to resist powersand negate their effects. IronWill doesn't stack with Brave,nor does it apply to subse-quent rolls resulting from Work the RoomREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+Your hero's words don't just inspire thosethey're directed at\u2014they often inspire othersas well. Once per turn, you can use Work theRoom to roll an additional skill die whenSupporting with Persuasion or Performance.The additional die Supports any other ally CharaCterSwho can see or hear your hero, and appliesto their next action, whatever it may be.Work the CrowdREQUIREMENTS: Seasoned, Work theRoomAs Work the Room but the hero now canSupport another on up to two of her Sup-port actions.Weird EdgesWeird Edges are slightly supernaturalin origin and so are usually onlyappropriate in games withthose elements. Checkwith your GM beforetaking them.Beast BondREQUIREMENTS: NoviceSome individuals have anextra ordinary bond withtheir animal companions.These characters mayspend their own Benniesfor any animals undertheir control, includingmounts, pets, familiars,and so on.Beast MasterREQUIREMENTS: Novice,Spirit d8+Animals take to your heroquickly and easily. Theywon't attack him unless heattacks them first or they'reenraged for some reason.The Beast Master's "animalmagnetism" is so great he'sattracted a loyal animal ofsome sort as well. This is typically51''an animal of Size 0 or smaller, subject to theGM's approval.The beast is an Extra and doesn't Advance in Rank or abilities. If a pet is dismissed or killed,the hero gains a replacement in 1d4 days.More Powerful Companions: Beast Mastermay be taken more than once. Choose one ofEGAVASthe effects below each time it's chosen:\u2022 Gain an additional pet.\u2022 Increase one of the pet's Traits one die type(only one Trait per pet).\u2022 Increase the maximum Size pet you mayhave by +1, to a maximum of 3.\u2022 Make one pet a Wild Card. (The hero mustbe of Heroic Rank).ChampionREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+,Fighting d6+Champions are holy (or unholy) men andwomen chosen to fight for a particular deityor religion. Most are pious souls ready andwilling to lay down their lives for a greatercause, but some may have been born intothe role and follow their path with somereluctance.Champions fight the forces of darkness (orgood), adding +2 damage when attackingsupernaturally evil (or good if they're evil)creatures. The bonus applies to area effectdamage, ranged attacks, powers, etc.The GM must decide which foes this bonusapplies to, but generally it's any evil (orgood!) creature born of magic or with anysupernatural abilities.ChiREQUIREMENTS: Veteran, Martial WarriorYour hero's martial arts training goes beyondthe norm and into the realm of the mystical.At the start of each combat encounter, shegains a "Chi Point" that can be spent to:\u2022 Reroll one of her failed attacks (even aCritical Failure).\u2022 Make an enemy discard an attack againsther, then reroll it from scratch.\u2022 Add +d6 damage to a successful Fightingattack made with her hands, feet, claws, orother Natural Weapons (this may Ace). Danger SenseREQUIREMENTS: NoviceYour hero can sense when something bad isabout to happen. When rolling for Surprise(page 108), he adds +2 to his Notice roll to actin the first round. With a raise, he starts theencounter on Hold.In other situations not covered by theSurprise rules (a sniper shot, pit trap,poisoned drink, etc.), Danger Sense giveshim a Notice roll at -2 (or +2 if a Notice rollis usually allowed) to detect the hazard andtake appropriate action. If this was an attackand the hero makes his Notice roll, the foedoesn't get The Drop against him.HealerREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Spirit d8+A hero with this Edge adds +2 to all Healingrolls, whether natural or magical in nature.Liquid CourageREQUIREMENTS: Novice, Vigor d8+This gregarious individual processes alcoholfar differently than most. The round afterconsuming a stiff drink (about eight ouncesof hard liquor or equivalent), her Vigorincreases one die type (increasing Toughnessas well). The drinker can also ignore one levelof Wound penalties (which stacks with otherabilities that do the same).Smarts, Agility, and all linked skills suffer a-1 penalty for the duration, however.The effect lasts for one hour after it begins,at which point the boozer suffers a level ofFatigue for the next four hours.ScavengerREQUIREMENTS: Novice, LuckOnce per encounter the hero may find,"suddenly remember," or dig up some much-needed piece of equipment, a handful ofammunition, or some other useful device.The Game Master decides what constitutesan encounter, and has the final word on whatcan and can't be found.''Legendary EdgesMost Legendary Edges are very specific totheir campaign world\u2014such as gaining astronghold or divine favor\u2014but a few fitmost anywhere. Here are a few that shouldfit most every setting or genre, from thedungeons of swords & sorcery worlds to thefar-flung worlds of futuristic space operas.FollowersREQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, LegendaryEach time this Edge is chosen, five followerscome to fight by the hero's side. If any are lost,others eventually take their place (how longis up to the GM and the circumstances).Followers must be cared for and generallywant a share of whatever loot, treasure, orother rewards the hero acquires. Otherwise,they are completely dedicated to their task.They won't throw their lives away but arewilling to risk them repeatedly in his service.Use the Soldier profile found on page 188for the followers. A hero may outfit her alliesas she sees fit. Followers Advance just likeplayer characters (see page 54).Use the Allies rules on page 111 to givethem distinctive personal ities if desired.ProfessionalREQUIREMENTS: Legendary, maximum dietype possible in affected TraitThe character is an expert at a particular skillor attribute (his choice). This increases theTrait and its limit one step (a d12+1 becomesa d12+2, for example). This Edge may beselected once per Trait.ExpertREQUIREMENTS: Legendary, Professionalin affected TraitAs the Professional Edge, increasing theTrait and its limit one additional step.MasterREQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, Legendary,Expert in affected TraitThe character's Wild Die increases to a d10when rolling the selected Expert Trait. SidekickREQUIREMENTS: Wild Card, LegendaryA character who triumphs over evil time andtime again becomes an inspiration to others.Eventually, one of these young crusaders mayattempt to join the hero in his epic quests.The hero gains a Novice Rank sidekick. Thesidekick is a Wild Card, starts each session CharaCterSwith two Bennies, may Advance, and hasabilities that complement his mentor. Theplayer character controls his sidekick just likeany other ally, though he may occasionallycause trouble by getting captured, runninginto danger when he's not supposed to, andso on. The player should be prepared for hisEdge to occasionally become a Hindrance!If the sidekick dies, he isn't replaced unlessthe hero chooses this Edge again. Fortunately,heroes may always spend Bennies for theirsidekicks as if she had the Common BondEdge. Sidekicks must actually take that Edgeto do the same for their mentors.Tough As NailsREQUIREMENTS: Legendary, Vigor d8+Your character keeps going when othersfall. She can take four Wounds before she'sIncapacitated (her maximum Wound penaltyis still -3).Tougher Than NailsREQUIREMENTS: Legendary, Tough asNails, Vigor d12+The hero can take up to five Wounds beforeshe's Incapacitated! Her maximum Woundpenalty is still -3.Weapon MasterREQUIREMENTS: Legendary, Fighting d12+The warrior increases his Parry by +1 and thebonus damage die for Fighting rolls is a d8instead of a d6 (see Bonus Damage, page 94).He must be armed to gain these benefits, butthis includes the Martial Artist Edge, claws, orother abilities that count as weapons.Master of ArmsREQUIREMENTS: Legendary, WeaponMasterIncrease the hero's Parry an additional+1 and his Fighting bonus damage die isnow a d10.53'